>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY JANUARY 3: LARGE
CHUNKS OF DEBRIS ARE DISCOVERED
UNDERWATER AS THE SEARCH FOR
AIRASIA FLIGHT 8501 CONTINUES.
AS THE G.O.P. PREPARES TO TAKE
POWER IN BOTH HOUSES OF
CONGRESS, NEW EFFORTS TO ROLL
BACK NO CHILD LEFT BEHIND.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
COLORADO'S LAW LEGALIZING
RECREATIONAL USE OF MARIJUANA
ENTERS YEAR TWO.
WHAT'S WORKING, AND WHAT'S NOT?
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WE BEGIN TONIGHT IN INDONESIA,
WHERE SEARCH TEAMS HAVE FOUND
FOUR LARGE OBJECTS ON THE SEA
FLOOR.
THE OBJECTS ARE BELIEVED TO BE
PARTS OF AIR ASIA FLIGHT 8501,
WHICH WENT DOWN LAST SUNDAY WITH
162 PEOPLE ON BOARD.
THE AIRBUS A320, TRAVELING FROM
SURABAYA, INDONESIA, TO
SINGAPORE DISAPPEARED LESS THAN
HALF WAY INTO WHAT WAS SUPPOSED
TO HAVE BEEN JUST UNDER A
TWO-HOUR FLIGHT.
SO FAR, AT LEAST 30 BODIES HAVE
BEEN RECOVERED.
DIFFICULT WEATHER CONDITIONS ARE
SLOWING THE INTERNATIONAL SEARCH
EFFORT.
WAVES AS HIGH AS 16 FEET HAVE
BEEN REPORTED IN THE AREA.
>> (translated): I ORDERED THE
DIVERS NOT TO RESUME UNTIL
TOMORROW.
THE CURRENTS IN THE SEA ARE VERY
STRONG.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY'S
DISCOVERY OF THE WRECKAGE CAME
AS INDONESIAN TRANSPORT
OFFICIALS SAID AIRASIA DID NOT
HAVE PERMISSION TO FLY THE
PLANNED ROUTE ON SUNDAYS.
A CARGO SHIP WITH 360 SYRIAN
MIGRANTS ON BOARD DOCKED IN
ITALY TODAY, DAYS AFTER BEING
ABANDONED BY ITS CREW.
AUTHORITIES DESCRIBED THE
RESCUED PASSENGERS AS BEING IN
RELATIVELY GOOD CONDITION AFTER
A THREE-DAY ORDEAL AT SEA.
MIGRANTS OFTEN PAY HUNDREDS OR
THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS TO TRY TO
ESCAPE THE VIOLENCE IN SYRIA.
THE UNITED NATIONS ESTIMATES
THAT 160,000 MIGRANTS ARRIVED IN
ITALY BY SEA DURING THE FIRST 11
MONTHS OF 2014.
A SENIOR STATE DEPARTMENT
OFFICIAL SUGGESTS THE U.S. MIGHT
TRIM AID TO THE PALESTINIAN
AUTHORITY LED BY MAHMOUD ABBAS
IF IT CONTINUES EFFORTS TO JOIN
THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
COURT.
THAT WOULD MAKE IT POSSIBLE FOR
THE PALESTINIANS TO PURSUE WAR
CRIMES AGAINST ISRAEL.
IN A SEPARATE INCIDENT
YESTERDAY, A GROUP OF ISRAELI
SETTLERS THREW ROCKS AT U.S.
CONSULATE VEHICLES IN THE WEST
BANK.
THE AMERICANS WERE THERE TO
INVESTIGATE ALLEGATIONS THAT
OLIVE TREES BELONGING TO
PALESTINIANS HAD BEEN DAMAGED BY
JEWISH SETTLERS.
NO ONE WAS INJURED.
IN LIBYA, FOR THE SECOND TIME IN
A WEEK, THERE'S BEEN AN ATTACK
ON CHRISTIANS.
15 ARMED MASKED MEN REPORTEDLY
WENT ROOM TO ROOM IN A
RESIDENTIAL COMPLEX, ASKING FOR
IDENTIFICATION PAPERS.
THEY REPORTEDLY LEFT MUSLIMS
ALONE BUT HANDCUFFED AND THEN
KIDNAPPED 13 EGYPTIAN COPTIC
CHRISTIANS.
A FEW DAYS AGO, SEVEN OTHER
COPTIC CHRISTIANS WERE ABDUCTED
BY ISLAMIC EXTREMISTS THERE.
A SUSPECTED AL QAEDA LEADER SAID
TO HAVE HELPED PLAN THE 1998
BOMBINGS OF U.S. EMBASSIES IN
KENYA AND TANZANIA HAS DIED IN
CUSTODY IN NEW YORK.
THE CAUSE WAS LISTED AS
COMPLICATIONS FROM LIVER
SURGERY.
THE MAN KNOWN AS ABU ANAS AL-
LIBI HAD BEEN CAPTURED BY
AMERICAN COMMANDOS IN OCTOBER
2013 IN LIBYA.
HE WAS TO HAVE STOOD TRIAL FOR
THE EMBASSY BOMBINGS LATER THIS
MONTH.
224 PEOPLE WERE KILLED IN THOSE
BOMBINGS.
A U.S. APPEALS COURT TODAY
DENIED A DEFENSE REQUEST TO
DELAY THE TRIAL OF ACCUSED
BOSTON MARATHON BOMBER, ZHOKHAR
TSARNAEV.
JURY SELECTION IS SET TO BEGIN
MONDAY.
HE IS ACCUSED OF THE APRIL 2013
BOMBINGS THAT KILLED THREE
PEOPLE AND INJURED SOME 260
OTHERS, A NUMBER OF THEM
SEVERELY.
AN EARTHQUAKE MEASURING 4.9 ON
THE RICHTER SCALE STRUCK A
REMOTE AREA OF IDAHO TODAY,
TRIGGERING ROCK SLIDES THAT
BLOCKED ROADWAYS BUT CAUSING NO
INJURIES.
AUTHORITIES SAY THERE WERE
SEVERAL SMALLER QUAKES IN THE
AREA RECENTLY.
IN CALIFORNIA, A NEW LAW HAS
GONE INTO EFFECT MAKING IT
POSSIBLE FOR UNDOCUMENTED
IMMIGRANTS TO GET DRIVER'S
LICENSES, AND, YESTERDAY,
THOUSANDS WENT TO THE DEPARTMENT
OF MOTOR VEHICLE OFFICES TO
APPLY.
THE NEW LAW, WHICH HAD BEEN
SUPPORTED BY THE STATE'S POLICE
CHIEFS AND INSURANCE
COMMISSIONER, REQUIRES PROOF
THAT APPLICANTS LIVE IN
CALIFORNIA BUT DOES NOT REQUIRE
PROOF OF LEGAL RESIDENCY.
THERE ARE 2.4 MILLION
UNDOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS THOUGHT
TO BE LIVING IN CALIFORNIA.
IT BECOMES THE TENTH STATE IN
THE NATION TO OFFER UNDOCUMENTED
IMMIGRANTS LICENSES.
AND THE F.B.I. REPORTS THAT THE
NUMBER OF VIOLENT CRIMES
COMMITTED IN THE UNITED STATES
DROPPED BY 4.4% IN 2013 COMPARED
TO THE YEAR BEFORE.
SUCH CRIMES INCLUDE MURDER,
RAPE, AGGRAVATED ASSAULT AND
ROBBERY.
LOUISIANA HAS THE NATION'S
HIGHEST MURDER RATE, BUT ALASKA,
NEW MEXICO AND NEVADA HAVE THE
HIGHEST PER CAPITA RATE OF
OVERALL VIOLENT CRIME.
ACCORDING TO THIS REPORT,
VERMONT AND MAINE ARE THE
NATION'S TWO SAFEST STATES.
>> Sreenivasan: CONGRESS RETURNS
TO WORK TUESDAY, AND REPUBLICANS
WILL HAVE SUBSTANTIAL MAJORITIES
IN BOTH THE HOUSE AND THE
SENATE.
REPUBLICAN LEADERS HAVE PROMISED
THEY WILL INITIATE LEGISLATION,
AND ONE OF THEIR FIRST EFFORTS
MAY BE TO ROLL BACK PARTS OF NO
CHILD LEFT BEHIND, THE EDUCATION
LAW PASSED UNDER PRESIDENT
GEORGE W. BUSH.
STEPHANIE SIMON IS THE SENIOR
EDUCATION REPORTER FOR POLITICO
AND JOINS US NOW FROM BOSTON.
SO, THIS WAS APPROVED IN A
BIPARTISAN MANNER.
WHAT'S WRONG NOW, TEN, 12 YEARS
LATER?
>> IT WAS A VERY BIPARTISAN BILL
AS YOU SAID, HAD HUGE SUPPORT.
TO GIVE YOU SOME IDEA, TED
KENNEDY AND JOHN BOEHNER WERE
COAUTHORS OF IT, SO THAT GIVES
YOU A HINT OF HOW WIDELY IT WAS
APPROVED.
AND NOW, 12 YEARS LATER, PEOPLE
ARE LOOKING BACK AND THINKING
THAT THERE ARE HUGE PROBLEMS
WITH THIS BILL.
IT MANDATED ANNUAL TESTING IN
READING AND MATH FOR STUDENTS IN
GRADES 3-8, AND AGAIN IN HIGH
SCHOOL, AND THERE'S A HUGE
BACKLASH NOW AGAINST SO MUCH
STANDARDIZED TESTING.
AND IT ALSO SET OUT STRICT
SANCTIONS FOR SCHOOLS THAT DID
NOT CONTINUALLY IMPROVE THEIR
STUDENTS' PERFORMANCE ON THOSE
TESTS.
AND THAT ALSO HAS CREATED A
HUGE BACKLASH AND KIND OF AN
IDEA THERE'S TOO MUCH FEDERAL
INTERFERENCE IN LOCAL SCHOOLS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND ONE OF THE
CRITIQUES IN THE IN-BETWEEN
PERIODS WERE THAT SCHOOLS
WERE TRYING TO TEACH TO THE
TEST JUST TO GET THOSE NUMBERS
UP, RIGHT?
>> EXACTLY, RIGHT.
THERE WERE SORT OF TWO
STRATEGIES.
A NUMBER OF STATES ACTUALLY
REDUCED THE RIGOR OF THEIR TEST,
SORT OF A RACE TO THE BOTTOM TO
TRY TO MAKE THE TEST EASIER SO
MORE KIDS WOULD PASS THEM AND
YOU WOULD LOOK BETTER AS A STATE
OR A SCHOOL; AND THE OTHER
STRATEGY WAS TO TEACH TO THE
TEST, AND THAT CREATED A
NARROWING OF THE CURRICULUM
WHERE THERE WAS SO MUCH FOCUS ON
GETTING THOSE MATH AND READING
SCORES UP THAT SUBJECTS LIKE
CIVICS AND SOCIAL STUDIES AND
SCIENCE AND ELECTIVES LIKE ART
AND P.E., KIND OF FELL BY THE
WAYSIDE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ARE SOME
OF THE POSSIBLE LEGISLATIVE
SOLUTIONS TO TRY TO ROLL BACK
ELEMENTS OF NO CHILD LEFT BEHIND
OR START FROM SCRATCH?
>> WELL, THIS IS A GARGANTUAN
BILL.
IT'S ABOUT 600 PAGES.
IT COVERS ABOUT $25 BILLION
IN ANNUAL FEDERAL FUNDING.
SO, IT'S NOT A SMALL TASK TO
REWRITE IT.
AND REALLY, THE KEY QUESTION
WILL BE HOW FAR THE
REPUBLICANS WANT TO PULL BACK
FROM FEDERAL INVOLVEMENT IN
EDUCATION POLICY.
AND, YOU KNOW, THE ANSWER MIGHT
SEEM "WAY BACK," YOU KNOW.
IT MIGHT SEEM OBVIOUS THAT THEY
WANT TO GO AS FAR-- PULL THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AS FAR AWAY
AS POSSIBLE.
BUT THERE'S A STRONG APPEAL TO
MANY REPUBLICANS, TO THE CHAMBER
OF COMMERCE, AND TO MANY
DEMOCRATS AS WELL TO CONTINUING
TO HAVE SOME FEDERAL ROLE SO
THAT STATES ARE HELD TO ACCOUNT
AND SCHOOLS ARE HELD TO ACCOUNT
FOR ACTUALLY TEACHING KIDS AND
MAKING SURE THAT THEY'RE
LEARNING.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ANNUAL
TESTING THAT'S BECOME SO
CONTENTIOUS, IT SEEMS THAT WAS
ONE OF THE WAYS THAT THE
ADMINISTRATION OR ANY MEMBER OF
CONGRESS COULD MEASURE THE
DISPARITIES IN OUTCOMES THAT ARE
HAPPENING THROUGHOUT THE UNITED
STATES.
>> RIGHT, AND THAT REMAINS
PROBABLY THE MOST POPULAR PART
OF THE BILL WAS THAT NOT THAT
THE TESTING PART ISN'T POPULAR,
BUT THE REQUIREMENT THAT STATES
AND SCHOOLS REPORT THE RESULTS
BY SUBGROUPS SO THAT YOU COULD
SEE EXACTLY HOW WELL OR HOW
POORLY CHILDREN WITH
DISABILITIES, CHILDREN WHO ARE
STILL LEARNING ENGLISH, CHILDREN
OF LOW-INCOME FAMILIES ARE DOING
ON THOSE TESTS.
AND HAVING THAT REQUIREMENT IN
PLACE WAS REALLY THE FIRST TIME
THAT WE WERE ABLE TO SEE AS A
NATION HOW POORLY SOME OF THOSE
SUBGROUPS WERE DOING BECAUSE IF
YOU REPORT IN THE AGGREGATE, YOU
KNOW, IT MIGHT LOOK LIKE YOU
HAVE AN 80% PASS RATE AND THAT
MIGHT SEEM GREAT, BUT THAT MIGHT
BE BECAUSE 99% OF THE KIDS OF
HIGH-INCOME FAMILIES ARE DOING
GREAT AND ONLY 30% OF THE KIDS
OF LOW-INCOME FAMILIES ARE DOING
OKAY AND THAT'S CLEARLY A
DISPARITY THAT HAS TO BE
ADDRESSED.
>> Sreenivasan: HEADING INTO
THIS CONGRESS IS ALSO MAKING FOR
SOME VERY STRANGE ALLIANCES.
THE TEACHERS UNIONS ARE COMING
OUT REALLY AGAINST THE
ADMINISTRATION, WHICH IS NOT
USUALLY A POSITION THAT YOU SEE.
>> EXACTLY.
THERE'S A LOT OF TENSION AND
A LOT OF STRANGE BEDFELLOWS.
THE NATIONAL EDUCATION
ASSOCIATION, THE BIGGEST
TEACHERS UNION, HAS BEEN ON A
CAMPAIGN FOR OVER A YEAR NOW
AGAINST WHAT THEY CALL TOXIC
TESTING, TOO MUCH TESTING.
AND THEY MIGHT FIND THEMSELVES
ALIGNED WITH REPUBLICANS WHO
WANT TO ROLL BACK THE TESTING,
WHERE THE ADMINISTRATION HAS
VOWED NOT TO DO THAT.
SO THAT'S ONE STRANGE ALLIANCE.
THE ADMINISTRATION IS ALSO
ALIGNED WITH REPUBLICANS ON
WANTING MORE OF A ROLL FOR
CHARTER SCHOOLS, AND THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT THE TEACHERS
UNION OPPOSES.
SO THERE'S KIND OF SHIFTING
ALLIANCES, AND IT WILL BE
INTERESTING TO SEE HOW IT ALL
SHAKES OUT.
>> Sreenivasan: STEPHANIE
SIMON, SENIOR EDUCATION REPORTER
FOR POLITICO, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
IF YOU ARE LOOKING FOR A SIGN OF
THE TIMES, CONSIDER THIS: A
FORMER UNITED STATES SENATOR,
84-YEAR-OLD MIKE GRAVEL OF
ALASKA, HAS A NEW JOB RUNNING A
COMPANY THAT MANUFACTURES
MARIJUANA PRODUCTS.
THE MOVEMENT TO LEGALIZE
MARIJUANA IS SPREADING RAPIDLY--
NOWHERE MORE SO THAN IN
COLORADO, WHERE THE LEGAL SALE
OF MARIJUANA FOR RECREATIONAL
USE IS BEGINNING ITS SECOND
YEAR.
IT'S CREATED THOUSANDS OF JOBS
AND GENERATED MILLIONS IN TAX
REVENUES.
BUT SOME COLORADANS WORRY THAT
THE LEGALIZATION OF THE DRUG HAS
NOT ELIMINATED THE UNDERGROUND
MARKET FOR IT, ESPECIALLY IN
MINORITY COMMUNITIES.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
RICK KARR UPDATES HIS REPORT
THAT FIRST AIRED IN SEPTEMBER.
>> Reporter: MARIJUANA GROWER
AND RETAILER ANDY WILLIAMS CAN
BARELY KEEP UP WITH THE DEMAND
FOR HIS PRODUCT THESE DAYS.
HE SAYS HE CAN'T IMAGINE A MORE
EXCITING AND LUCRATIVE INDUSTRY
TO BE IN RIGHT NOW.
BUT THE BUZZ IS ALL COMING FROM
CAPITALISM.
HE DOESN'T EVEN LIKE CANNABIS.
>> I TRIED EVERY FEW YEARS JUST
TO PROVE TO MYSELF I STILL DON'T
LIKE IT.
YOU KNOW, IT JUST AFFECTS ME
VERY POORLY.
>> Reporter: WHEN HE STARTED HIS
BUSINESS A FEW YEARS AGO,
WILLIAMS COULD ONLY SELL MEDICAL
MARIJUANA.
THAT PUT HIM IN POSITION TO BE
ONE OF THE FIRST TO SELL
RECREATIONAL CANNABIS WHEN IT
BECAME LEGAL LAST YEAR.
BUSINESS HAS BEEN SO GOOD THAT
WILLIAMS NOW EMPLOYS 75 PEOPLE
AND EXPECTS TO HIRE MORE.
AND THIS PAST AUGUST HE OPENED A
NEW STATE-OF-THE ART FACILITY
THAT WILL PRODUCE 7,000 POUNDS
OF CANNABIS A YEAR.
>> IT'S MANUFACTURING IS WHAT IT
IS, AS FAR AS I'M CONCERNED.
YOU ARE MANUFACTURING MARIJUANA.
THIS IS AN INDUSTRIAL
MANUFACTURING PLANT THAT GROWS
MARIJUANA.
>> Reporter: STORES LIKE THESE
CAN NOW SELL UP TO AN OUNCE OF
MARIJUANA TO CUSTOMERS WHO ARE
21 AND OVER.
THE PRODUCTS COME IN ALL KINDS
OF FORMS: CANNABIS BUDS FROM A
RANGE OF VARIETIES BRED TO TREAT
PARTICULAR AILMENTS, PROVIDE A
MELLOW BUZZ, OR DELIVER A
POWERFUL RUSH.
PRE-ROLLED JOINTS, POT-LACED
BROWNIES, HARD CANDY, AND
CHOCOLATE BARS, MARIJUANA
INFUSED BEVERAGES AND MASSAGE
OIL.
CONSUMERS SPEND TENS OF MILLIONS
OF DOLLARS A MONTH ON THOSE
PRODUCTS, BUT WILLIAMS IS SURE
THERE'S A LOT MORE MONEY TO BE
MADE IN HIS BUSINESS.
>> YOU KNOW, I DID THIS SO THAT
MY FAMILY CAN BE SET UP FOR
THE REST OF THEIR LIVES.
RIGHT NOW, I ALREADY KNOW OF
SOME BLUE CHIP COMPANIES THAT
ARE ON THE... ON THE START LINE.
THEY'RE GOING TO COME AND BUY
PEOPLE UP, AND QUITE HONESTLY, I
WANT TO BE ONE OF THOSE GUYS.
>> Reporter: ONE OF THE BENEFITS
ATTACHED TO LEGALIZATION WAS
THAT IT WOULD ELIMINATE THE
BLACK MARKET.
BUT THAT MARKET IS STILL
THRIVING, ACCORDING TO A 39-
YEAR-OLD MARIJUANA GROWER WHO
ASKED US TO CALL HIM JOHN DOE
AND CONCEAL HIS IDENTITY
BECAUSE HE SELLS ON THE
UNDERGROUND MARKET.
THE ILLEGAL TRADE IS DOING
ESPECIALLY WELL IN BLACK AND
LATINO COMMUNITIES, AND HE SAYS
IT WORKS THE SAME WAY IT DID
WHEN POT WAS ILLEGAL.
>> YOU HAVE THAT ONE GUY, THAT
GUY THAT SHINES, THAT'S THE
ROBIN HOOD OF THE NEIGHBORHOOD.
THIS MAN SUPPLIES A LITTLE
GHETTO AREA.
SIMPLE AS THAT.
BREAKS HIS OWN POUND INTO LITTLE
OUNCES AND HELPS EVERYBODY IN
HIS COMMUNITY.
SO THEY CAN AFFORD IT WITH HIM.
THAT'S HOW IT'S HAPPENED.
>> Reporter: YEAH.
AND THAT'S HOW IT HAPPENED
BEFORE, TOO.
>> YEAH.
YEAH.
NOTHING'S CHANGED.
>> Reporter: JOHN DOE SAYS LOW-
INCOME BUYERS TURN TO THE BLACK
MARKET BECAUSE PRICES ARE HIGHER
AT LEGAL RETAIL STORES.
THERE'S CONFLICTING INFORMATION,
BUT AN OUNCE OF POT ON THE BLACK
MARKET CAN COST AS LITTLE AS
$180.
AT THE STORE ANDY WILLIAMS OWNS,
YOU HAVE TO PAY AROUND $240 FOR
AN OUNCE.
THAT'S PARTLY BECAUSE THE PRICE
INCLUDES A 15% EXCISE TAX, A 10%
MARIJUANA TAX, THE STATE SALES
TAX, AND DENVER'S MARIJUANA
SALES TAX.
>> THE TAXES ARE AN OVERREACH
AND EXCESSIVE.
AND IT'S A REGRESSIVE TAX AND IT
IMPACTS THE POOR THE MOST.
>> Reporter: LARISA BOLIVAR WAS
INVOLVED IN THE FIGHT TO MAKE
MARIJUANA LEGAL FOR MEDICAL
PURPOSES.
SHE USES IT HERSELF TO TREAT
STRESS.
SHE CAMPAIGNED FOR LEGALIZATION,
BUT SHE DOESN'T LIKE HOW IT'S
WORKING OUT.
SHE BELIEVES ALL THOSE TAXES
GUARANTEE A BLACK MARKET.
BUT TAXES HAVE BEEN BENEFICIAL,
ACCORDING TO MASON TVERT, WHO
ALSO CAMPAIGNED FOR LEGALIZATION
AND HELPED DRAFT THE STATE'S
REGULATIONS.
IN THE FIRST TEN MONTHS, THOSE
TAXES HAVE GENERATED NEARLY $41
MILLION.
A CHUNK OF THAT IS SLATED FOR
PUBLIC SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION.
BESIDES, HE SAYS, THE LEGAL
MARKET OFFERS SOME THINGS THAT
CONSUMERS FIND MORE IMPORTANT
THAN THE LOWEST PRICE.
>> VARIETY, CONVENIENCE, SAFETY.
THAT'S WHAT DRIVES EVERY PRODUCT
IN THE ENTIRE WORLD.
YOU KNOW, THAT'S WHAT'S GOING TO
DRIVE THIS MARKET.
IF SOMEONE IS LOWER INCOME OR A
HIGHER INCOME, CHANCES ARE
THEY'RE GOING TO GO TO A STORE
AND PURCHASE IT BECAUSE IT'LL BE
SAFE.
IT'LL BE CONVENIENT.
THERE'LL BE VARIETY.
THESE ARE WHAT DRIVE PEOPLE'S
DECISIONS.
>> Reporter: HOW HAS THAT WORKED
OUT SO FAR?
I MEAN, IS THE BLACK MARKET
GONE?
IS THE BLACK MARKET GOING AWAY?
>> I THINK IT'S ABSURD FOR
ANYONE TO ASSUME THAT WE CAN
ELIMINATE A BLACK MARKET THAT
GREW OVER 80-PLUS YEARS WITHIN
THE COURSE OF EIGHT, NINE
MONTHS.
BUT WE'VE SEEN THIS INDUSTRY
TAKE A HUGE BITE OUT OF THE
UNDERGROUND MARKET.
>> Reporter: TO ENTER THE LEGAL
MARIJUANA INDUSTRY, YOU HAVE TO
BE A COLORADO RESIDENT IN GOOD
LEGAL STANDING.
YOU ALSO NEED THE CAPITAL TO GET
LICENSED, AND THAT CAN COST TENS
OF THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS.
>> IT'S CLASSIST.
THE REGULATIONS SUPPORT THOSE
THAT HAVE ACCESS TO WEALTH.
AND MIDDLE AND LOWER CLASSES
DON'T HAVE ACCESS TO WEALTH.
I CAN'T JUST GO AND ASK MY DAD,
"HEY, CAN I HAVE $20,000 FOR
LICENSING AND APPLICATION FEES?"
YOU KNOW?
AND THEN "CAN I GET A MILLION
DOLLARS SO I CAN GET A
PROPERTY?"
>> Reporter: TO START THE LEGAL
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA BUSINESS,
AN ENTREPRENEUR NEEDS A LOT OF
CAPITAL TO FUND AN INDOOR GROW
FACILITY, HIRE EMPLOYEES WHO'LL
CULTIVATE THE PRODUCT, INSTALL
SECURITY SYSTEMS, ALL WHILE
COMPLYING WITH STATE
REGULATIONS.
TVERT ACKNOWLEDGES THE EXPENSES
LIMIT THE ABILITIES OF
MINORITIES TO ENTER THE
INDUSTRY.
>> THIS IS A SYMPTOM OF RACE
RELATIONS AND ECONOMIC JUSTICE
IN OUR NATION.
THIS IS NOT EXCLUSIVE TO
MARIJUANA.
YOU KNOW, RIGHT NOW, PEOPLE IN
LOWER INCOME AREAS OR
COMMUNITIES OF COLOR ARE FACING
DISCRIMINATION AND BEARING THE
BRUNT OF SOCIAL POLICIES ACROSS
THE BOARD, NOT JUST FOR
MARIJUANA.
>> Reporter: BUT TVERT SAYS
SINCE LEGALIZATION THERE HAVE
BEEN FEWER ARRESTS OF MINORITIES
FOR MARIJUANA POSSESSION.
>> PEOPLE OF COLOR WERE BEING
DISPROPORTIONATELY IMPACTED WHEN
IT CAME TO MARIJUANA POSSESSION,
AND NOW WHETHER YOU'RE WHITE,
WHETHER YOU'RE BLACK, WHETHER
YOU'RE A LATINO, YOU ARE NO
LONGER GOING TO BE BOOKED AND
CONVICTED AND TREATED LIKE A
CRIMINAL THE REST OF YOUR LIFE
SIMPLY FOR POSSESSING MARIJUANA.
>> Reporter: BUT FOR ANYONE WHO
WAS CAUGHT AND CONVICTED OF A
DRUG-RELATED FELONY BEFORE
LEGALIZATION, STATE LAW MAKES IT
VIRTUALLY IMPOSSIBLE TO JOIN THE
INDUSTRY NOW THAT MARIJUANA IS
LEGAL.
JOHN DOE SAYS THAT KEEPS A LOT
OF PEOPLE WORKING ON THE BLACK
MARKET.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF PEOPLE THAT
HAVE BROKEN THE LAW THAT ARE
GREAT ENTREPRENEURS, WORK VERY
HARD, HAVE GOOD WORK ETHICS,
FAMILY VALUES, GOOD
COMMUNICATION SKILLS.
I MEAN, I DEFINITELY BELIEVE
THAT THEY SHOULD BE GIVEN A
CHANCE.
THE RULES AND REGULATIONS SHOULD
ALLOW A GOOD GROWER THAT'S BEEN
IN TROUBLE TO DO THIS.
THEY'RE NOT HURTING ANYBODY.
THEY'RE NOT OUT THERE, YOU KNOW,
STEALING AND ROBBING.
MOST OF THESE PEOPLE PROBABLY
GOT CAUGHT UP TRYING TO MAKE A
LIVING, TRYING TO MAKE MONEY.
>> Reporter: THE COUNTER-
ARGUMENT, THOUGH, IS IT ALSO
SHOWS THAT THEY ARE WILLING TO
BREAK THE LAW, BECAUSE IT WAS
ILLEGAL.
SO MAYBE IF WE GIVE THEM A
LICENSE AND THEY OPEN UP A GROW
FACILITY, LICENSED, MAYBE THEY
WON'T PAY THE TAXES.
>> THEY'RE MORE PRONE TO
BREAKING LAWS.
WELL, YOU KNOW, THEY SAY THAT
ABOUT MANY PEOPLE, BUT YOU HAVE
TO SEE THEIR TRACK RECORD.
>> Reporter: JOHN DOE SAYS HIS
FAMILY HAS BEEN GROWING
MARIJUANA FOR MANY GENERATIONS
IN LATIN AMERICA.
HE BELIEVES THE LEGAL INDUSTRY
SHOULD BENEFIT FROM HIS
EXPERIENCE AND PASSION FOR THE
PLANT.
>> IT'S THE END RESULT IS THIS
LITTLE FLOWER THAT'S GROWING UP
AND ALL FULL OF JOY.
WHEN THIS COMES OUT, THAT'S WHEN
YOU SAY, "OKAY, I AM PROUD OF MY
WORK."
>> Reporter: THIS PAST NOVEMBER,
VOTERS IN OREGON AND ALASKA
APPROVED INITIATIVES LEGALIZING
THE POSSESSION AND SALE OF
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA.
LAST MONTH, THE DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE RESPONDED TO INQUIRIES
FROM NATIVE AMERICAN TRIBES BY
ANNOUNCING THAT IT WOULD ALLOW
TRIBAL GOVERNMENTS TO MAKE THEIR
OWN DECISIONS ON THE CULTIVATION
AND SALE OF MARIJUANA, EVEN IN
STATES WHERE IT'S STILL
OUTLAWED.
LEGALIZATION IN COLORADO IS
STILL A WORK IN PROGRESS.
BUT THE STATE'S A PIONEER AND AS
OTHER STATES CONSIDER, OR
IMPLEMENT, NEW MARIJUANA LAWS,
THEY'LL BE WATCHING TO SEE HOW
COLORADO DOES.
>> Sreenivasan: TAKE A CLOSER
LOOK INSIDE ONE OF COLORADO'S
LARGEST POT DISPENSARIES.
VISIT newshour.pbs.org.
IT WAS LAST APRIL, MORE THAN
EIGHT MONTHS, SINCE MORE THAN
200 SCHOOLGIRLS WERE CAPTURED
BY ISLAMIC MILITANTS IN NIGERIA.
AND THOUGH THERE HAVE BEEN
PERIODIC REPORTS ABOUT THEIR
IMMINENT RELEASE, NOT ONE OF
THEM HAS BEEN FOUND OR FREED.
FOR THE LATEST ON THE SEARCH AND
THE INCREASING TENSIONS BETWEEN
NIGERIA AND THE UNITED STATES,
WE ARE JOINED ONCE AGAIN BY
DREW HINSHAW OF THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL."
HE'S REPORTING TONIGHT FROM
ACCRA IN NEARBY GHANA.
SO I THINK THE QUESTION ON MOST
AMERICANS' MINDS IS WHY HAVEN'T
WE FOUND THESE GIRLS AND WHY ARE
WE HEARING ABOUT MORE
KIDNAPPINGS THROUGHOUT THE YEAR
BY BOKO HARAM?
>> THE SHORT ANSWER IS THAT BOKO
HARAM IS DOING SOMETHING VERY
MUCH LIKE WINNING IN THE
NORTHEAST OF NIGERIA.
THE GIRLS, THERE ARE 276 AT
FIRST, AND NOW IT'S DOWN TO 219
AFTER A NUMBER OF THEM ESCAPED.
BUT THAT'S JUST A SMALL SEGMENT
OF THE TOTAL NUMBER OF PEOPLE
BOKO HARAM HAS KIDNAPPED.
IT'S A SECT THAT CONTROLS A
VERY LARGE SECTION OF NORTH-
EASTERN NIGERIA THAT INCLUDES
MOUNTAINS, CAVES, FORESTS, SMALL
TOWNS, EVEN SMALL CITIES AT THIS
POINT.
IT'S KIND OF A REALLY HARD THING
TO FIND INDIVIDUAL GIRLS WHO
HAVE ALL BEEN SPLIT UP AT THIS
POINT.
EARLY ON IN MAY, THE U.S. SENT
DRONES AND MANNED SURVEILLANCE
FLIGHTS, AND THEY DID SPOT LARGE
GROUPS OF GIRLS TWICE IN JUNE
AND JULY.
THEY HAVE NO IDEA IF THOSE ARE
THE GIRLS OR IF THOSE ARE A
SEPARATE GROUP OF GIRLS THAT
BOKO HARAM KIDNAPPED.
BUT THEY DID FIND LARGE GROUPS
OF GIRLS CAMPED OUT IN A FIELD.
SINCE THEN, THE U.S. HAS SCALED
BACK.
THEY SENT THE DRONES ELSEWHERE,
WHERE THEY'RE NEEDED ELSEWHERE
IN THE WORLD.
THEY WERE FLYING JUST A FEW
MANNED FLIGHTS A WEEK LAST TIME
I CHECKED IN.
THE NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT BY
ITSELF SAYS IT KNOWS THE
LOCATION OF THE GIRLS BUT CAN'T
GET THEM OUT.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT'S
HAPPENED TO THEM?
>> THEY DON'T SEE THE GIRLS AS
HAVING ANY VALUE TO THEM.
THEY KIND OF AREN'T CUT OUT FOR
LIFE IN A MILITANT GROUP.
BUT, FRANKLY, THEY'RE NOT GOING
TO GET RID OF THEM, EITHER.
IT SEEMS LIKE THERE'S SORT OF AN
IMPASSE.
THERE'S NOT A LOT OF TRUST
BETWEEN NIGERIA'S GOVERNMENT AND
BOKO HARAM TO COME TO SOME SORT
OF NEGOTIATED SETTLEMENT,
EITHER.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, SORT OF TWO
RELATIONSHIPS I WANT TO EXPLORE
VERY BRIEFLY IS, ONE, THAT
THE TENSIONS IN THOSE
NEGOTIATIONS BETWEEN BOKO HARAM
AND THE NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT, BUT
THERE ALSO SEEMS TO BE AN
INCREASED AMOUNT OF TENSION
BETWEEN THE NIGERIAN GOVERNMENT
AND THE U.S. GOVERNMENT.
>> THE FACT IS, WHEN IT COMES TO
COMMUNICATION BETWEEN BOKO HARAM
AND NIGERIA'S GOVERNMENT, IT'S
ALL A LOT OF SPECULATION.
IN FEBRUARY, THE PRESIDENT SAID
HE DOESN'T TALK TO THEM.
HE SAID THAT JOURNALISTS TALK TO
THEM MORE THAN HE DOES.
AND WHEN HE SAID THAT I KIND OF
FURROWED MY BROW BECAUSE FRANKLY
I DON'T KNOW A SINGLE JOURNALIST
WHO HAS BEEN ABLE TO HAVE A
CONFIRMED, VERIFIABLE
CONVERSATION WITH BOKO HARAM
IN THE PAST COUPLE OF YEARS.
SINCE THEN, IN OCTOBER,
NIGERIA'S GOVERNMENT SAID,
"HEY, LOOK, WE'VE GOT THIS
BREAKTHROUGH, WE'VE BEEN TALKING
TO THEM.
THEY'RE GOING TO RELEASE THESE
GIRLS."
IN FACT, THEY SAID THEY'RE GOING
TO RELEASE ALL THE CAPTIVES BOKO
HARAM HAS EVER TAKEN, WHICH IS
HUNDREDS AND HUNDREDS IF NOT
THOUSANDS OF MEN, BOYS, WOMEN
AND CHILDREN.
THEY NEVER DID.
BOKO HARAM CAME OUT WITH A TAPE
A FEW DAYS LATER SAYING, "JOKE'S
ON YOU.
WE HAVE NO INTENTION OF
NEGOTIATING WITH YOU.
YOU ARE AN INFIDEL GOVERNMENT,
AND WE WILL CONTINUE WAGING
JIHAD."
THE NIGERIANS ARE FRUSTRATED BY
THIS.
AND I THINK SOME OF THAT ANGER
IS BEING DEFLECTED AGAINST THE
UNITED STATES.
THERE HAVE BEEN A LOT OF
COMMENTS LATELY LIKE, "WELL, WE
COULD DEAL WITH BOKO HARAM, BUT
THE FACT IS THIS BIG NEOCOLONIAL
POWER, AMERICA, WON'T LET US BUY
HELICOPTERS BECAUSE THEY SAY
WE'RE ABUSING HUMAN RIGHTS."
I THINK SOME OF THAT IS
POLITICAL POSTURING.
SOME OF THAT IS, BASICALLY,
THERE'S AN ELECTION IN FEBRUARY,
AND NIGERIA'S LOOKING FOR... THE
GOVERNMENT'S LOOKING FOR A
REASON WHY THEY HAVEN'T WRAPPED
UP A NOW FIVE-YEAR-LONG CONFLICT
WITH BOKO HARAM.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, DREW
HINSHAW OF THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL," JOINING US TONIGHT
FROM ACCRA, GHANA.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, TOO.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
VIEWERS LIKE YOU: YOUR FEEDBACK
ABOUT SOME OF OUR RECENT WORK.
MANY OF YOU COMMENTED ABOUT OUR
UPDATED SIGNATURE SEGMENT LAST
SUNDAY, DESCRIBING HOW SOME
STRUGGLING TOWNS HAVE USED FOR-
PROFIT COMPANIES TO COLLECT
FINES AND THAT SOME POOR PEOPLE
ARE BEING JAILED WHEN THEY CAN'T
PAY.
THIS, EVEN IF THEY'VE BEEN
ACQUITTED OF THE CHARGES THEY
FACED.
>> I DIDN'T... I DIDN'T SELL
DRUGS.
I DIDN'T BREAK INTO ANYONE'S
HOME.
I DIDN'T KILL ANYBODY.
I HAD AN EXPIRED TAG.
>> Sreenivasan: OVERWHELMINGLY,
YOU THOUGHT THE PRACTICE WAS
WRONG.
ANGELA ERICHSEN WROTE US:
"DEBTORS PRISON-- WE'VE
REGRESSED 200 YEARS."
FROM LINDA RUMMEL DEVENDORF:
"PURELY DICKENSIAN TIMES WE'RE
ENTERING."
JANICE FRIEDMAN SAID:
"RIDICULOUS!
LET THEM WORK IT OFF WITH
COMMUNITY SERVICE!"
AND PATRICIA EVANS ADDED THIS:
"DUE PROCESS REQUIRES AN
IMPARTIAL DECISION MAKER;
ANYTIME A PRIVATIZED SYSTEM IS
USED, BY DEFINITION, DUE PROCESS
IS GONE."
JEFF GOLDMAN WROTE:
"BESIDES BEING OBVIOUSLY
UNCONSTITUTIONAL, WHATEVER
HAPPENED TO FAIR PLAY AND
TREATING PEOPLE WHO ARE
OTHERWISE GOOD PEOPLE WITH
RESPECT AND RATIONAL PENALTIES
FOR VERY MINOR OFFENSES?
PARTICULARLY SINCE THEY WERE
FOUND INNOCENT OF THE ORIGINAL
CHARGES.
THIS IS JUST ANOTHER CASE OF THE
POOR OR WORKING POOR GETTING THE
SHAFT, SO TO SPEAK.
THIS STORY MAKES ME SICK TO MY
STOMACH."
AND STEVEN MITCHELL HAD THIS TO
SAY: "OUR SYSTEM IS NO LONGER
BASED ON JUSTICE, IT IS BASED ON
REVENUE.
NO LONGER IS IT 'PROTECT AND
SERVE'; IT'S 'HARASS AND
EXTORT.'"
JUDITH HARLAN SAID: "PRISONS ARE
VERY EXPENSIVE, AND FUNDS ARE
PROVIDED BY LOCAL AND
NATIONAL GOVERNMENT.
TAXPAYERS, SELF DEFEATING."
FINALLY, A FEW OF YOU PRAISED
OUR REPORTING.
GREG CHILDRE WROTE: "SHINING
LIGHT ON A SYSTEM THAT IS SO
BROKEN."
AS ALWAYS, YOU CAN LEAVE YOUR
COMMENTS ON OUR WORK ONLINE AT
newshour.pbs.org, OR TWEET US
@newshour, OR LEAVE A COMMENT ON
THE NEWSHOUR FACEBOOK PAGE.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME LATE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
EDWARD BROOKE, WHO, IN 1966,
BECAME THE FIRST AFRICAN
AMERICAN ELECTED TO THE U.S.
SENATE SINCE RECONSTRUCTION HAS
DIED.
THE MASSACHUSETTS REPUBLICAN WAS
95.
PRESIDENT OBAMA WILL VISIT
MICHIGAN, TENNESSEE AND ARIZONA
IN THE DAYS LEADING UP TO HIS
JANUARY 20 STATE OF UNION
ADDRESS.
THE WHITE HOUSE SAYS HE WILL
ANNOUNCE NEW EXECUTIVE ACTIONS
AND LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS ON
HOUSING, EDUCATION AND JOBS.
THAT'S ALL FOR TONIGHT.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
SEE YOU BACK HERE TOMORROW.